Word tokenization is an important
part of text processing.
Every natural language processing task
has to normalize the text in some way.
We start by segmenting or
tokenizing the words off.
We often have to normalize
the format of each of the words and,
as part of this process, we're going to
have to break out sentences from the text.
So let's start by talking about
this kind of word tokenization.
How many words are there in a sentence?
Here's a sentence.
I do main-,
mainly business data processing.
How many words are in that sentence?
It's a complicated question.
There is a word like.
Is a word?
Or how about the cutoff main of mainly?
So we call things like main a fragment,
we call things like a filled pause.
So for certain applications we
might want to be counting these,
if we're dealing with speech synthesis or
speech recognition or correcting things.
What about cat and cats?
We talked about the Cat in the Hat.
So we defined the term lemma,
two words are the same lemma if
they have the same stem, the same part
of speech, roughly the same word sense.
So cat and cats are both nouns.
They have similar meanings.
We say that cat and cats are the same
lemma, so the same word in that sense.
We define the term wordform to mean
the full inflected surface form.
So cat and cats, by that definition
of a word, are different words and
the different wordforms.
So we're going to use different
definitions depending on our goals.
So let's look at an example sentence.
They lay back on the San Francisco
grass and looked at the stars and
their, and so on.
And let's ask how many words
there are in this sentence.
So count for yourself.
We can define words in a couple ways.
Word types,
how many vocabulary elements there are,
how many unique words there are.
And word tokens,
how many instances of that particular
type there are in a running text.
So, how many tokens do we have in here?
Well, should be easy to count.
One, two, three, four, five, and so on.
So, if we count San and
Francisco separately, we end up with 15.
If we count San Francisco as one token,
we end up with 14.
So even the definition of a word
depends a little bit in what we're
going to do with our spaces.
How about types, count for yourself.
Well, there's 13 types, again,
depending on how we count.
So we have multiple copies.
The word the, there's the and the.
Again, it depends if we count
San Francisco as one word or two.
And remember our lemmas,
we might decide that they and
their, since they are the same lemma,
although they're different word forms, we
might want to count them as the same type.
Depending, again, on our goal.
In general, we're going to be
referring to the number of tokens,
which comes up whenever we're
counting things, with capital N.
And we'll use capital V to mean the
vocabulary, the set of different types.
And we'll use set notation,
so the cardinality of the set V
is the size of the vocabulary.
Although sometimes, for simplification,
we'll just use capital V to mean the
vocabulary size when it's not ambiguous.
So, how many words and tokens and types
are there in the kind of data sets that we
look at in natural language processing?
Let's look at a couple of these.
Data sets of text are called corpora and
here's three important corpora,
the switchboard corpus of phone
conversations has 2.4 million word
tokens and has 20,000 word types
in those 2.4 million words.
Shakespeare has just under
a million word tokens,
Shakespeare's quite a small corpus.
He wrote a 800,000 words in his lifetime.
And, in that less than a million words,
he actually used 31,000 distinct words.
So he had a very broad vocabulary,
famously.
And if you look at a very huge corpus,
the Google N-grams corpus that has
a trillion different tokens, a very large
number of words, there's 13 million types.
So how many words are there in English?
Well, if you look at conversation,
20,000 different words.
If you look at Shakespeare, 30,000 words.
And if you combine the two, probably
somewhere, not quite the sum of the two,
but some larger number.
But if you look at the Google N-grams,
we have 13 million words.
And of course, some of those
are probably URLs and email addresses.
But even if you eliminate all of those,
the number of words in
the language is very large.
Maybe there's a million words of English.
And in fact, Church and Gale have
suggested that the size of the vocabulary
grows greater with the square
root of the number of tokens.
So as you get n tokens, the square
root of n more vocabulary items.
So vocabulary keeps growing and
growing and its names and
other kinds of things that contribute
to this growing in vocabulary.
We're going to introduce some
standard Unix tools that are used for
text processing.
So I have here a corpus of Shakespeare,
Shakespeare's complete works.
You can see, here's the sonnets, and
it goes on through all the plays.
So let's start by extracting
all the words in the corpus.
So we're going to do this
using the tr program.
All right, so
the tr program takes character and
it maps every instance of that
character into another character.
And we specify tr -c,
which means compliment.
So it means take every character
that's not one of these characters and
turn it into this character.
So in this case it's take every
non-alphabetic character and
turn it into a carriage return.
So we're going to replace all
the periods and commas and
spaces in Shakespeare with newlines.
So we're going to create one line,
one word per line in this way.
So let's look at that.
So there's, we've now turned
the sonnets into one word per line.
And now we're going to sort those words
to let us look at the unique word types.
So let's do that.
And you can see here's all the A's,
there's a lot of them.
A occurs a lot in Shakespeare.
And this is a very boring way to
look through all of Shakespeare,
we don't want to do this.
So let's, instead, use the program uniq.
And the program uniq will
take that sorted file and
tell us, for each unique type,
the count of times that it occurs.
So let's try that.
So here we have all the words in
Shakespeare with a count along the left,
this is the product of the uniq program.
And we can walk through.
So, we know that in Shakespeare,
the word Achievement, with a capital A,
occurs once.
The word Achilles appears 79 times.
The word Acquaint six times, and so on.
So that's interesting, but it would be
nice if we didn't have to just look at
these words in alphabetical order, but if
we could look at them in frequency order.
So let's take the same list of words and
now resort it by frequency.
So now we have the most frequent word in
Shakespeare is the word the followed by
the word I followed by the word and and
we have the actual counts in Shakespeare.
So that here is our lexicon of
Shakespeare, sorted in frequency order.
There's some problems.
One is that the word and
occurs twice because we didn't map our
uppercase words to lowercase words.
So let's fix the mapping of case first.
Let's try that again.
We're going to map all
of the uppercase letters
to lowercase letters in Shakespeare.
Then we're going to pipe that to
another instance of the tr program
which replaces all of
the non-alphabetics with newlines.
And now we're going to do our
sorting as we did before.
We're going to use uniq to
find all the individual types.
Uniq -c tells us the actual count.
And then we're going to sort again.
[INAUDIBLE] Means numerically and
r means start from the highest one.
And then we'll look at those,
so let's do that.
All right, so now we've solved
the problem of the ands, so
now we only have lowercase and,
we don't have our uppercase and appearing.
But we have another problem.
We have this d here.
Why is the word d or the word s,
why are they so frequent in Shakespeare?
We also have to decide a standard that
we're going to need for [INAUDIBLE] words.
So for example, if our input is
Finland apostrophe s capital,
how are we going to tokenize
Finland's depends on our goal.
So we might choose to keep
all the apostrophes in and
then we have Finland apostrophe s.
We might choose to replace all
the apostrophes with nothing or
we might choose to eliminate
all the apostrophe s's.
Similarly, we might choose to
expand what'res to what are and
the I'ms to I ams because if we're,
for example,
looking for all the cases of I, if for
some sentimental analysis task.
Or if we're looking for
cases of negation for
some task,
we might want to turn isn't into is not.
How about Hewlett-Packard.
We've to decide whether Hewlett-Packard
are going to be represented Or.
Or with a space.
The same is true with phrases
like state of the art.
We'll have to decide for words like
lowercase, should they have a dash?
Should they have no dash at all?
Should they have a space?
We talked about the issue
of San Francisco.
And then,
issues with periods become a huge issue.
We have to decide if we're going to
represent m.p.h., leave the periods in.
And then all of our algorithms
that use periods for
splitting things are going to
have to be sensitive to this.
The issue of tokenization becomes even
more complicated in other languages.
We have the French phrase l'ensemble,
[INAUDIBLE] the l' be a separate word and,
if so,
do we turn it into the full article le or
do we keep as l' or just an l by itself.
We'd like it to match the same
word ensemble even if a different
article occurs before it.
So we're going to want to
break them up for
some reasons, but then we're stuck
with these sort of non-words.
So another issue we have to deal with.
In German, the long nouns are not
segmented as they are in English.
So a word like life insurance company
employee in English would be segmented up
in German.
We're going to into these very long
phrase, but spelled as a single word.
So, for
German tasks like information retrieval,
we're going to need to
do a compound splitting.
In Chinese and
Japanese we have a different problem.
There's no spaces at
all between the words.
So here's [INAUDIBLE] and we've shown
you the original Chinese sentence here.
And now here's the sentence segmented out.
So here's Sharapova now lives in US,
and so on.
And so in English, we segment out
[INAUDIBLE], Chinese we don't.
So if we want to do an actual
language processing
on Chinese [INAUDIBLE] applications,
we need to break things up into words.
And so we'll need some way of doing that.
Similarly, in Japanese, we have
the problem that there's no spaces between
words and we have the problem there are
multiple alphabets that are intermingled.
There's the Katakana alphabet, there's
the Hiragana alphabet, there are Kanji,
which are like the Chinese characters,
and there's Romaji, the Roman letters.
Another complicating issue that has to
be dealt with in tokenizing Japanese.
Word tokenization in Chinese is a common
research problem that has to be addressed
when doing any kind of Chinese
natural language processing.
And the characters in Chinese
represent a single syllable,
often a single morpheme, and the average
word is about 2.4 characters long.
So a word has to be broken up into
approximately two or three characters.
And there are lots of complicated
algorithms for this, but
there is a standard baseline segmentation
algorithm called the max-match,
the maximum matching algorithm,
also called the greedy algorithm.
So let's look at the max-match
as an algorithm.
We're given a word list of Chinese,
so a vocabulary of Chinese,
a dictionary, and a string.
We'll start a pointer at
the beginning of the string.
We'll find the longest word in the
dictionary that matches the string so far,
starting at the pointer.
We'll move the pointer over the word in
the string and then we'll go back and
move on for the next word.
Let's just see an example of that working.
I'm going to pick an English example
that's easier to think about.
We'll take the phrase, imagine English
was written like Chinese with no spaces.
We'd have a phrase like thecatinthehat,
all run together.
And we have a dictionary that has
words like the and a and cat.
So we look at this and
we say what's the longest word in our
dictionary that matches the beginning?
And the longest word in our dictionary
is the, because thec is not a word,
and theca is not a word and so
on, so we'll start with the.
And now we've gotten to here.
And now we say what's the longest
word starting with c?
And the longest word is cat.
So now we say, what's the longest
word starting with the i?
And so on, and we do a good job.
How about the phrase Thetabledownthere,
where we've taken the spaces
out of the table down there.
What's our segmentation,
our max-match segmentation algorithm,
going to do with Thetabledownthere?
Think a little for yourself.
You may think that what it's going to
do is produce the table down there, but
there's a problem.
English has a lot of long words.
English has the word theta for
the variable.
And so, instead of the table down there,
we're going to get theta,
right after that, bled, and
then own and then there.
So we're going to get
theta bled own there.
So max-match is, in fact,
not a generally good algorithm for
this kind of pseudo-English,
English without spaces.
Because English has these very long words
and short words all mixed together.
But since Chinese, in general,
has relatively consistent word length,
this works very well for Chinese.
And it turns out that modern probabilistic
segmentation algorithms work even better.
So that's the end of our
section on word tokenization.